












2020:

March:
I think we did a pretty lowkey birthday -- celebrating at home due to COVID really getting bad

August 2020 - The summer of 2020 was Anna and I's first summer as homeowners (we were renting from my parents for part of the year and bought the house from them in the fall). The previous owners had two raised garden beds and a ground garden along the fence. As you can see in this post <a>XXX</a>, we were really excited to grow a garden!

gallery:

To be honest, we sort of knocked it out of the park that first year. We watered the whole garden ever day or so, we weeded weekly. We had more cucumbers then we could eat, several wonderful basil plants, some melons that would start to get big enough to eat and then an animal would take a single bite... every time. The tomatos never quite got past being green.

The following 2 summers that we lived in that house, we would plant a bunch of stuff in the spring and then watch it turn into weeds. We grew some pretty large weeds.

September:

image:

We had my grandparents over for dinner. We made some food from the garden. I think I made <a>J Kenji Food Lab's</a> tuscon soup with rosemary from our garden. We ate outside and had an overall really nice evening. My grandfather ended up dying about a year later so maybe I am being a little sentimental about that evening but it was a really nice time.

October:
Anna and I took a trip out to visit brother William in Denver

November:

In November, the <a>general election happened</a>. 

On November 4th, Anna's Dad passed away unexpectedly. Tom was a really great man who we have both missed over the last few years. He was a great cook and I always enjoyed when Anna would invite me over for family dinner. He made a delicious rendition of the <a href="https://www.wallacestation.com/#menu">Wallace Station</a> Merv's Hot Ham and Jalepeno. I know that it has been really tough on Anna and I wish I could do more to help her.

gallery:

December:

In addition to the regular holdiday stuff, there was a day in December where we went over to my grandparent's house in Lawrenceburg. My grabdfather (Bob)'s Mom (XXX) was into family history and had many boxes as pictures, documents, and written notes. That day, we took those boxes out and looked through them. I am also very interested in family history and I was asked if I wanted to start going through those boxes. I felt a little overwhelmed by the amount in the boxes, and though that I would need to decicate a time to comeover and talk to my grandfather about everything in there. I declided to spend a lot of time that day looking over stuff and I really wish I had. He seemed so healthy then and I didn't know that he would be gone soon. I never did look through that box with him and its something I regret.

gallery: